mr speaker mr vice president members of congress the first lady of the united
states and my fellow americans less than one year has passed since i first
stood at this podium in this majestic chamber to speak on behalf of the
american people and to address their concerns their hopes and their dreams
that night our new administration had already taken very swift action a new
tide of optimism was already sweeping across our land each day since we have
gone forward with a clear vision and a righteous mission to make america great
again for all americans over the last year we have made incredible progress
and achieved extraordinary success we have faced challenges we expected and
others we could never have imagined we have shared in the heights of victory
and the pains of hardship we have endured floods and fires and storms but
through it all we have seen the beauty of america's soul and the steel in
america's spine each test has forged new american heroes to remind us who we
are and show us what we can be we saw the volunteers of the cajun navy racing
to the rescue with their fishing boats to save people in the aftermath of a
totally devastating hurricane we saw strangers shielding strangers from a hail
of gunfire on the las vegas strip we heard tales of americans like coast guard
petty officer ashlee leppert who is here tonight in the gallery with melania
ashlee was aboard one of the first helicopters on the scene in houston during
the hurricane harvey through 18 hours of wind and rain ashlee braved live
power lines and deep water to help save more than 40 lives ashlee we all thank
you thank you very much we heard about americans like firefighter david
dahlberg he's here with us also david faced down walls of flame to rescue
almost 60 children trapped at a california summer camp threatened by those
devastating wildfires to everyone still recovering in texas florida louisiana
puerto rico and the virgin islands everywhere we are with you we love you and
we always will pull through together always thank you to david and the brave
people of california thank you very much david great job some trials over the
past year touched this chamber very personally with us tonight is one of the
toughest people ever to serve in this house a guy who took a bullet almost
died and was back to work three and a half months later the legend from
louisiana congressman steve scalise i think they like you steve we are
incredibly grateful for the heroic efforts of the capitol police officers the
alexandria police and the doctors nurses and paramedics who saved his life and
the lives of many others some in this room in the aftermath yes yes in the
aftermath of that terrible shooting we came together not as republicans or
democrats but as representatives of the people but it is not enough to come
together only in times of tragedy tonight i call upon all of us to set aside
our differences to seek out common ground and to summon the unity we need to
deliver for the people this is really the key these are the people we were
elected to serve over the last year the world has seen what we always knew
that no people on earth are so fearless or daring or determined as americans
if there is a mountain we climb it if there is a frontier we cross it if
there's a challenge we tame it if there's an opportunity we seize it so let's
begin tonight by recognizing that the state of our union is strong because our
people are strong and together we are building a safe strong and proud america
since the election we have created 24 million new jobs including including
200000 new jobs in manufacturing alone tremendous numbers after years and
years of wage stagnation we are finally seeing rising wages unemployment
claims have hit a 45 year low it's something i'm very proud of african
american unemployment stands at the lowest rate ever recorded and hispanic
american unemployment has also reached the lowest levels in history
smallbusiness confidence is at an alltime high the stock market has smashed
one record after another gaining 8 trillion and more in value in just this
short period of time the great news the great news for americans' 401(k)
retirement pension and college savings accounts have gone through the roof and
just as i promised the american people from this podium 11 months ago we
enacted the biggest tax cuts and reforms in american history our massive tax
cuts provide tremendous relief for the middle class and small business to
lower tax rates for hardworking americans we nearly doubled the standard
deduction for everyone now the first 24000 earned by a married couple is
completely taxfree we also doubled the child tax credit a typical family of
four making 75000 will see their tax bill reduced by 2000 slashing their tax
bill in half in april this will be the last time you will ever file under the
old and very broken system and millions of americans will have more takehome
pay starting next month a lot more we eliminated an especially cruel tax that
fell mostly on americans making less than 50000 a year forcing them to pay
tremendous penalties simply because they couldn't afford governmentordered
health plans we repealed the core of the disastrous obamacare the individual
mandate is now gone thank heaven we slashed the business tax rate from 35
percent all the way down to 21 percent so american companies can compete and
win against anyone else anywhere in the world these changes alone are
estimated to increase average family income by more than 4000 a lot of money
small businesses have also received a massive tax cut and can now deduct 20
percent of their business income here tonight are steve staub and sandy
keplinger of staub manufacturing a small beautiful business in ohio they've
just finished the best year in their 20year history because of tax reform they
are handing out raises hiring an additional 14 people and expanding into the
building next door good feeling one of staub's employees corey adams is also
with us tonight corey is an allamerican worker he supported himself through
high school lost his job during the 2008 recession and was later hired by
staub where he trained to become a welder like many hardworking americans
corey plans to invest his tax cut raise into his new home and his two
daughters' education corey please stand and he's a great welder i was told
that by the man that owns that company that's doing so well so congratulations
corey since we passed tax cuts roughly 3 million workers have already gotten
tax cut bonuses many of them thousands and thousands of dollars per worker and
it's getting more every month every week apple has just announced it plans to
invest a total of 350 billion in america and hire another 20000 workers and
just a little while ago exxonmobil announced a 50 billion investment in the
united states just a little while ago this in fact is our new american moment
there has never been a better time to start living the american dream so to
every citizen watching at home tonight no matter where you've been or where
you've come from this is your time if you work hard if you believe in yourself
if you believe in america then you can dream anything you can be anything and
together we can achieve absolutely anything tonight i want to talk about what
kind of future we are going to have and what kind of a nation we are going to
be all of us together as one team one people and one american family can do
anything we all share the same home the same heart the same destiny and the
same great american flag together we are rediscovering the american way in
america we know that faith and family not government and bureaucracy are the
center of american life the motto is in god we trust and we celebrate our
police our military and our amazing veterans as heroes who deserve our total
and unwavering support here tonight is preston sharp a 12 year old boy from
redding california who noticed that veterans' graves were not marked with
flags on veterans day he decided all by himself to change that and started a
movement that has now placed 40000 flags at the graves of our great heroes
preston a job well done young patriots like preston teach all of us about our
civic duty as americans and i met preston a little while ago and he is
something very special that i can tell you great future thank you very much
for all you've done preston thank you very much preston's reverence for those
who have served our nation reminds us of why we salute our flag why we put our
hands on our hearts for the pledge of allegiance and why we proudly stand for
the national anthem americans love their country and they deserve a government
that shows them the same love and loyalty in return for the last year we have
sought to restore the bonds of trust between our citizens and their government
working with the senate we are appointing judges who will interpret the
constitution as written including a great new supreme court justice and more
circuit court judges than any new administration in the history of our country
we are totally defending our second amendment and have taken historic actions
to protect religious liberty and we are serving our brave veterans including
giving our veterans choice in their healthcare decisions last year congress
also passed and i signed the landmark va accountability act since its passage
my administration has already removed more than 1500 va employees who failed
to give our veterans the care they deserve and we are hiring talented people
who love our vets as much as we do and i will not stop until our veterans are
properly taken care of which has been my promise to them from the very
beginning of this great journey all americans deserve accountability and
respect and that's what we are giving to our wonderful heroes our veterans
thank you so tonight i call on congress to empower every cabinet secretary
with the authority to reward good workers and to remove federal employees who
undermine the public trust or fail the american people in our drive to make
washington accountable we have eliminated more regulations in our first year
than any administration in the history of our country we have ended the war on
american energy and we have ended the war on beautiful clean coal we are now
very proudly an exporter of energy to the world in detroit i halted government
mandates that crippled america's great beautiful autoworkers so that we can
get motor city revving its engines again and that's what's happening many car
companies are now building and expanding plants in the united states something
we haven't seen for decades chrysler is moving a major plant from mexico to
michigan toyota and mazda are opening up a plant in alabama a big one and we
haven't seen this in a long time it's all coming back very soon auto plants
and other plants will be opening up all over our country this is all news
americans are totally unaccustomed to hearing for many years companies and
jobs were only leaving us but now they are roaring back they're coming back
they want to be where the action is they want to be in the united states of
america that's where they want to be exciting progress is happening every
single day to speed access to breakthrough cures and affordable generic drugs
last year the fda approved more new and generic drugs and medical devices than
ever before in our country's history we also believe that patients with
terminal conditions and terminal illness should have access to experimental
treatment immediately that could potentially save their lives people who are
terminally ill should not have to go from country to country to seek a cure i
want to give them a chance right here at home it's time for congress to give
these wonderful incredible americans the right to try one of my greatest
priorities is to reduce the price of prescription drugs in many other
countries these drugs cost far less than what we pay in the united states and
it's very very unfair that is why i have directed my administration to make
fixing the injustice of high drug prices one of my top priorities for the year
and prices will come down substantially watch america has also finally turned
the page on decades of unfair trade deals that sacrificed our prosperity and
shipped away our companies our jobs and our wealth our nation has lost its
wealth but we're getting it back so fast the era of economic surrender is
totally over from now on we expect trading relationships to be fair and very
importantly reciprocal we will work to fix bad trade deals and negotiate new
ones and they'll be good ones but they'll be fair and we will protect american
workers and american intellectual property through strong enforcement of our
trade rules as we rebuild our industries it is also time to rebuild our
crumbling infrastructure america is a nation of builders we built the empire
state building in just one year isn't it a disgrace that it can now take 10
years just to get a minor permit approved for the building of a simple road?
i am asking both parties to come together to give us safe fast reliable and
modern infrastructure that our economy needs and our people deserve tonight
i'm calling on congress to produce a bill that generates at least 15 trillion
for the new infrastructure investment that our country so desperately needs
every federal dollar should be leveraged by partnering with state and local
governments and where appropriate tapping into private sector investment to
permanently fix the infrastructure deficit and we can do it any bill must also
streamline the permitting and approval process getting it down to no more than
two years and perhaps even one together we can reclaim our great building
heritage we will build gleaming new roads bridges highways railways and
waterways all across our land and we will do it with american heart and
american hands and american grit we want every american to know the dignity of
a hard day's work we want every child to be safe in their home at night and we
want every citizen to be proud of this land that we all love so much we can
lift our citizens from welfare to work from dependence to independence and
from poverty to prosperity as tax cuts create new jobs let's invest in
workforce development and let's invest in job training which we need so badly
let's open great vocational schools so our future workers can learn a craft
and realize their full potential and let's support working families by
supporting paid family leave as america regains its strength opportunity must
be extended to all citizens that is why this year we will embark on reforming
our prisons to help former inmates who have served their time get a second
chance at life struggling communities especially immigrant communities will
also be helped by immigration policies that focus on the best interests of
american workers and american families for decades open borders have allowed
drugs and gangs to pour into our most vulnerable communities they've allowed
millions of lowwage workers to compete for jobs and wages against the poorest
americans most tragically they have caused the loss of many innocent lives
here tonight are two fathers and two mothers evelyn rodriguez freddy cuevas
elizabeth alvarado and robert mickens their two teenage daughters kayla cuevas
and nisa mickens were close friends on long island but in september 2016 on
the eve of nisa's 16th birthday such a happy time it should have been neither
of them came home these two precious girls were brutally murdered while
walking together in their hometown six members of the savage ms13 gang have
been charged with kayla and nisa's murders many of these gang members took
advantage of glaring loopholes in our laws to enter the country as illegal
unaccompanied alien minors and wound up in kayla and nisa's high school evelyn
elizabeth freddy and robert tonight everyone in this chamber is praying for
you everyone in america is grieving for you please stand thank you very much i
want you to know that 320 million hearts are right now breaking for you we
love you thank you while we cannot imagine the depths of that kind of sorrow
we can make sure that other families never have to endure this kind of pain
tonight i am calling on congress to finally close the deadly loopholes that
have allowed ms13 and other criminal gangs to break into our country we have
proposed new legislation that will fix our immigration laws and support our
ice and border patrol agents these are great people these are great great
people that work so hard in the midst of such danger so that this can never
happen again the united states is a compassionate nation we are proud that we
do more than any other country anywhere in the world to help the needy the
struggling and the underprivileged all over the world but as president of the
united states my highest loyalty my greatest compassion my constant concern is
for america's children america's struggling workers and america's forgotten
communities i want our youth to grow up to achieve great things i want our
poor to have their chance to rise so tonight i am extending an open hand to
work with members of both parties democrats and republicans to protect our
citizens of every background color religion and creed my duty and the sacred
duty of every elected official in this chamber is to defend americans to
protect their safety their families their communities and their right to the
american dream because americans are dreamers too here tonight is one leader
in the effort to defend our country homeland security investigations special
agent celestino martinez he goes by dj and cj he said call me either one so
we'll call you cj served 15 years in the air force before becoming an ice
agent and spending the last 15 years fighting gang violence and getting
dangerous criminals off of our streets tough job at one point ms13 leaders
ordered cj's murder and they wanted it to happen quickly but he did not cave
to threats or to fear last may he commanded an operation to track down gang
members on long island his team has arrested nearly 400 including more than
220 ms13 gang members and i have to tell you what the border patrol and ice
have done we have sent thousands and thousands and thousands of ms13 horrible
people out of this country or into our prisons so i just want to congratulate
you cj you're a brave guy thank you very much and i asked cj what's the
secret? he said we're just tougher than they are and i like that answer
(laughter and applause) now let's get congress to send you and all of the
people in this great chamber have to do it we have no choice cj we're going to
send you reinforcements and we're going to send them to you quickly it's what
you need over the next few weeks the house and senate will be voting on an
immigration reform package in recent months my administration has met
extensively with both democrats and republicans to craft a bipartisan approach
to immigration reform based on these discussions we presented congress with a
detailed proposal that should be supported by both parties as a fair
compromise one where nobody gets everything they want but where our country
gets the critical reforms it needs and must have here are the four pillars of
our plan the first pillar of our framework generously offers a path to
citizenship for 18 million illegal immigrants who were brought here by their
parents at a young age that covers almost three times more people than the
previous administration covered under our plan those who meet education and
work requirements and show good moral character will be able to become full
citizens of the united states over a 12 year period the second pillar fully
secures the border that means building a great wall on the southern border and
it means hiring more heroes like cj to keep our communities safe crucially our
plan closes the terrible loopholes exploited by criminals and terrorists to
enter our country and it finally ends the horrible and dangerous practice of
catch and release the third pillar ends the visa lottery a program that
randomly hands out green cards without any regard for skill merit or the
safety of american people it's time to begin moving towards a meritbased
immigration system one that admits people who are skilled who want to work who
will contribute to our society and who will love and respect our country the
fourth and final pillar protects the nuclear family by ending chain migration
under the current broken system a single immigrant can bring in virtually
unlimited numbers of distant relatives under our plan we focus on the
immediate family by limiting sponsorships to spouses and minor children this
vital reform is necessary not just for our economy but for our security and
for the future of america in recent weeks two terrorist attacks in new york
were made possible by the visa lottery and chain migration in the age of
terrorism these programs present risks we can just no longer afford it's time
to reform these outdated immigration rules and finally bring our immigration
system into the 21st century these four pillars represent a downthemiddle
compromise and one that will create a safe modern and lawful immigration
system for over 30 years washington has tried and failed to solve this problem
this congress can be the one that finally makes it happen most importantly
these four pillars will produce legislation that fulfills my ironclad pledge
to sign a bill that puts america first so let's come together set politics
aside and finally get the job done these reforms will also support our
response to the terrible crisis of opioid and drug addiction never before has
it been like it is now it is terrible we have to do something about it in 2016
we lost 64000 americans to drug overdoses 174 deaths per day 7 per hour we
must get much tougher on drug dealers and pushers if we are going to succeed
in stopping this scourge my administration is committed to fighting the drug
epidemic and helping get treatment for those in need for those who have been
so terribly hurt the struggle will be long and it will be difficult but as
americans always do in the end we will succeed we will prevail as we have seen
tonight the most difficult challenges bring out the best in america we see a
vivid expression of this truth in the story of the holets family of new mexico
ryan holets is 27 years old an officer with the albuquerque police department
he's here tonight with his wife rebecca thank you ryan last year ryan was on
duty when he saw a pregnant homeless woman preparing to inject heroin when
ryan told her she was going to harm her unborn child she began to weep she
told him she didn't know where to turn but badly wanted a safe home for her
baby in that moment ryan said he felt god speak to him you will do it because
you can he heard those words he took out a picture of his wife and their four
kids then he went home to tell his wife rebecca in an instant she agreed to
adopt the holets named their new daughter hope ryan and rebecca you embody the
goodness of our nation thank you thank you ryan and rebecca as we rebuild
america's strength and confidence at home we are also restoring our strength
and standing abroad around the world we face rogue regimes terrorist groups
and rivals like china and russia that challenge our interests our economy and
our values in confronting these horrible dangers we know that weakness is the
surest path to conflict and unmatched power is the surest means to our true
and great defense for this reason i am asking congress to end the dangerous
defense sequester and fully fund our great military as part of our defense we
must modernize and rebuild our nuclear arsenal hopefully never having to use
it but making it so strong and so powerful that it will deter any acts of
aggression by any other nation or anyone else perhaps someday in the future
there will be a magical moment when the countries of the world will get
together to eliminate their nuclear weapons unfortunately we are not there yet
sadly last year i also pledged that we would work with our allies to
extinguish isis from the face of the earth one year later i am proud to report
that the coalition to defeat isis has liberated very close to 100 percent of
the territory just recently held by these killers in iraq and in syria and in
other locations as well but there is much more work to be done we will
continue our fight until isis is defeated army staff sergeant justin peck is
here tonight near raqqa last november justin and his comrade chief petty
officer kenton stacy were on a mission to clear buildings that isis had rigged
with explosive so that civilians could return to that city hopefully soon and
hopefully safely clearing the second floor of a vital hospital kenton stacy
was severely wounded by an explosion immediately justin bounded into the
boobytrapped and unbelievably dangerous and unsafe building and found kenton
but in very very bad shape he applied pressure to the wound and inserted a
tube to reopen an airway he then performed cpr for 20 straight minutes during
the ground transport and maintained artificial respiration through two and a
half hours and through emergency surgery kenton stacy would have died if it
were not for justin's selfless love for his fellow warrior tonight kenton is
recovering in texas raqqa is liberated and justin is wearing his new bronze
star with a v for valor staff sergeant peck all of america salutes you
terrorists who do things like place bombs in civilian hospitals are evil when
possible we have no choice but to annihilate them when necessary we must be
able to detain and question them but we must be clear terrorists are not
merely criminals they are unlawful enemy combatants and when captured overseas
they should be treated like the terrorists they are in the past we have
foolishly released hundreds and hundreds of dangerous terrorists only to meet
them again on the battlefield including the isis leader albaghdadi who we
captured who we had who we released so today i'm keeping another promise i
just signed prior to walking in an order directing secretary mattis who is
doing a great job thank you to reexamine our military detention policy and to
keep open the detention facilities in guantanamo bay i am asking congress to
ensure that in the fight against isis and al qaeda we continue to have all
necessary power to detain terrorists wherever we chase them down wherever we
find them and in many cases for them it will now be guantanamo bay at the same
time as of a few months ago our warriors in afghanistan have new rules of
engagement along with their heroic afghan partners our military is no longer
undermined by artificial timelines and we no longer tell our enemies our plans
last month i also took an action endorsed unanimously by the us senate just
months before i recognized jerusalem as the capital of israel shortly
afterwards dozens of countries voted in the united nations general assembly
against america's sovereign right to make this decision in 2016 american
taxpayers generously sent those same countries more than 20 billion in aid
that is why tonight i am asking congress to pass legislation to help ensure
american foreignassistance dollars always serve american interests and only go
to friends of america not enemies of america as we strengthen friendships all
around the world we are also restoring clarity about our adversaries when the
people of iran rose up against the crimes of their corrupt dictatorship i did
not stay silent america stands with the people of iran in their courageous
struggle for freedom i am asking congress to address the fundamental flaws in
the terrible iran nuclear deal my administration has also imposed tough
sanctions on the communist and socialist dictatorships in cuba and venezuela
but no regime has oppressed its own citizens more totally or brutally than the
cruel dictatorship in north korea north korea's reckless pursuit of nuclear
missiles could very soon threaten our homeland we are waging a campaign of
maximum pressure to prevent that from ever happening past experience has
taught us that complacency and concessions only invite aggression and
provocation i will not repeat the mistakes of past administrations that got us
into this very dangerous position we need only look at the depraved character
of the north korean regime to understand the nature of the nuclear threat it
could pose to america and to our allies otto warmbier was a hardworking
student at the university of virginia and a great student he was on his way to
study abroad in asia otto joined a tour to north korea at its conclusion this
wonderful young man was arrested and charged with crimes against the state
after a shameful trial the dictatorship sentenced otto to 15 years of hard
labor before returning him to america last june horribly injured and on the
verge of death he passed away just days after his return otto's wonderful
parents fred and cindy warmbier are here with us tonight along with otto's
brother and sister austin and greta please incredible people you are powerful
witnesses to a menace that threatens our world and your strength truly
inspires us all thank you very much thank you tonight we pledge to honor
otto's memory with total american resolve thank you finally we are joined by
one more witness to the ominous nature of this regime his name is mr ji
seongho in 1996 seongho was a starving boy in north korea one day he tried to
steal coal from a railroad car to barter for a few scraps of food which were
very hard to get in the process he passed out on the train tracks exhausted
from hunger he woke up as a train ran over his limbs he then endured multiple
amputations without anything to dull the pain or the hurt his brother and
sister gave what little food they had to help him recover and ate dirt
themselves permanently stunting their own growth later he was tortured by
north korean authorities after returning from a brief visit to china his
tormentors wanted to know if he'd met any christians he had and he resolved
after that to be free seongho traveled thousands of miles on crutches all
across china and southeast asia to freedom most of his family followed his
father was caught trying to escape and was tortured to death today he lives in
seoul where he rescues other defectors and broadcasts into north korea what
the regime fears most the truth today he has a new leg but seongho i
understand you still keep those old crutches as a reminder of how far you've
come your great sacrifice is an inspiration to us all please thank you
seongho's story is a testament to the yearning of every human soul to live in
freedom it was that same yearning for freedom that nearly 250 years ago gave
birth to a special place called america it was a small cluster of colonies
caught between a great ocean and a vast wilderness it was home to an
incredible people with a revolutionary idea that they could rule themselves
that they could chart their own destiny and that together they could light up
the entire world that is what our country has always been about that is what
americans have always stood for always strived for and always done atop the
dome of this capitol stands the statue of freedom she stands tall and
dignified among the monuments to our ancestors who fought and lived and died
to protect her monuments to washington and jefferson and lincoln and king
memorials to the heroes of yorktown and saratoga to young americans who shed
their blood on the shores of normandy and the fields beyond and others who
went down in the waters of the pacific and the skies all over asia and freedom
stands tall over one more monument this one this capitol this living monument
this is the moment to the american people we're a people whose heroes live not
only in the past but all around us defending hope pride and defending the
american way they work in every trade they sacrifice to raise a family they
care for our children at home they defend our flag abroad and they are strong
moms and brave kids they are firefighters and police officers and border
agents medics and marines but above all else they are americans and this
capitol this city this nation belongs entirely to them our task is to respect
them to listen to them to serve them to protect them and to always be worthy
of them americans fill the world with art and music they push the bounds of
science and discovery and they forever remind us of what we should never ever
forget the people dreamed this country the people built this country and it's
the people who are making america great again as long as we are proud of who
we are and what we are fighting for there is nothing we cannot achieve as long
as we have confidence in our values faith in our citizens and trust in our god
we will never fail our families will thrive our people will prosper and our
nation will forever be safe and strong and proud and mighty and free thank you
and god bless america goodnight
